readme.md, before:

To use this code:

Create and activate a Python virtual environment (recommended):

```bash
# Create a virtual environment in a .venv folder
python3 -m venv .venv

# Activate it (macOS/Linux)
source .venv/bin/activate
```

Install the required packages:

```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

Get your OpenRouter API key from [OpenRouter](https://openrouter.ai/keys)
Create a `.env` file (or copy from `.env.example`) with your key:

```
OPENROUTER_API_KEY=your-api-key-here
```

Note: The app automatically loads environment variables from `.env` using `python-dotenv`.

Run the script:

```bash
python agent.py
```

You can also pass the task on the command line or enter it interactively:

```bash
# Pass task via CLI args
python agent.py "Create a brief guide about Python decorators"

# Or run without args and you'll be prompted to input a task
python agent.py
```
The key components are:

- **OpenRouterLLM**: Handles API calls to DeepSeek v3 through OpenRouter.
- **PlanAndExecuteAgent**: Unified agent that creates plans, executes them step by step, and can optionally use tools.
- **Tool classes**: Extensible framework for adding capabilities (example included: `SearchTool`).

The agent will automatically break down any task into steps, execute each step using DeepSeek v3, optionally invoke tools, and synthesize the results into a final output.

## Architecture

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    U[User Task Input]
    U --> RUN[PlanAndExecuteAgent.run]
    RUN --> PLAN[create_plan]
    PLAN --> P1[planning_prompt]
    P1 --> LLM1[OpenRouterLLM.generate]
    LLM1 --> PARSE[Parse into steps list]
    PARSE --> LOOP[For each Step]
    LOOP --> EXEC[execute_step]
    EXEC --> CTX[_get_context]
    EXEC --> TOOLQ{Tool referenced?}
    TOOLQ -- Yes --> TEXEC[tool.execute]
    TEXEC --> P4[tool_interpretation_prompt]
    P4 --> LLM4[OpenRouterLLM.generate]
    LLM4 --> UPDATE[Update step status/result]
    TOOLQ -- No --> P2[execution_prompt]
    P2 --> LLM2[OpenRouterLLM.generate]
    LLM2 --> UPDATE
    UPDATE --> LOOP
    LOOP --> SYN[_synthesize_results]
    SYN --> P3[synthesis_prompt]
    P3 --> LLM3[OpenRouterLLM.generate]
    LLM3 --> FINAL[Final Result]
```

Notes:
- Prompts are constructed in `prompts.py` and consumed by `agent.py`.
- API key is read from `.env` via `python-dotenv` (`OPENROUTER_API_KEY`).
- The unified `PlanAndExecuteAgent` invokes registered `Tool`s when their names appear in step descriptions (example tool: `SearchTool`).

## Logging

- Each run writes a detailed session log to the `agentlog/` directory next to `agent.py`.
- The log file name is timestamped as `yyyymmddhhmm.log` (e.g., `202509112259.log`).
- Logged details include:
  - Planning prompts and LLM responses.
  - Parsed steps (or fallback plan notice).
  - Execution prompts and LLM responses for each step.
  - Tool selections, tool outputs, and the tool-interpretation prompts and LLM responses.
  - Synthesis prompt and final LLM response.
  - Any errors encountered during planning, execution, or synthesis.

You can open the latest file in `agentlog/` to see the full trace of what the agent did for that session.

## Design Notes and TODOs

- Chat state is currently stateless per call.
  - `OpenRouterLLM.generate()` posts a single `user` message each time. There is no server-side session ID; prior context is not automatically preserved.
  - Consequence: Step 1 execution does not include the original task/system prompt unless explicitly added to the execution prompt.
  - TODO: introduce a chat-history flow where we resend prior turns on every API call via a `messages` array, including a seed `system` message.

- Keep model prompts in natural language, not JSON.
  - The API envelope is JSON, but the `content` sent to the model should remain plain, well-structured text.
  - Encoding prompts as JSON inside `content` tends to reduce quality and isn’t needed.

- Structured JSON logging for readability.
  - Add `_log_json(event, payload)` to record prompts/responses as one-line JSON records.
  - Log planning prompt/response, execution prompt/response (with `step_id`, `description`, `context`), tool usage, and synthesis prompt/response.
  - Optionally log a redacted request summary before each API call (model, temperature, max_tokens, count of messages) and a response summary (chars, preview).

- Step confirmation and perceived pause.
  - The prompt `Proceed with Step N ... [Y/N]` is read via `input()`; after `Y`, the agent constructs the execution prompt and performs a network call to the LLM.
  - The delay seen after confirming is the API round-trip/model latency; progress is captured in `agentlog/` (confirmation → prompt logged → response logged).

### Implementation Plan (deferred)

1) Add chat-history support
   - Extend `OpenRouterLLM` with `generate_messages(messages, temperature, max_tokens)`.
   - Track `self.chat_history: List[Dict[str,str]]` in `PlanAndExecuteAgent`.
   - Seed a `system` turn at `run()` start; append planning/step prompts as `user` turns and responses as `assistant` turns.

2) JSON structured logging
   - Add `_log_json(event, payload)` beside `_log()` and switch key log points to JSON entries.
   - Do not log secrets (API key). Prefer previews for very long texts.

3) Optional: include task in Step 1 prompt
   - Modify `execution_prompt()` to optionally prepend the original task to the first step’s prompt (config flag), while still relying on chat history for later steps.

4) Optional: tool-observation turns
   - If tools are used, emit an `<observation>`-style `user` message and call `generate_messages()` again to mimic tool-feedback loops.

Commit message:

Added “Diagrams (draw.io / diagrams.net)” section with an embedded SVG.

readme.md, after:

To use this code:

Create and activate a Python virtual environment (recommended):

```bash
# Create a virtual environment in a .venv folder
python3 -m venv .venv

# Activate it (macOS/Linux)
source .venv/bin/activate
```

Install the required packages:

```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

Get your OpenRouter API key from [OpenRouter](https://openrouter.ai/keys)
Create a `.env` file (or copy from `.env.example`) with your key:

```
OPENROUTER_API_KEY=your-api-key-here
```

Note: The app automatically loads environment variables from `.env` using `python-dotenv`.

Run the script:

```bash
python agent.py
```

You can also pass the task on the command line or enter it interactively:

```bash
# Pass task via CLI args
python agent.py "Create a brief guide about Python decorators"

# Or run without args and you'll be prompted to input a task
python agent.py
```
The key components are:

- **OpenRouterLLM**: Handles API calls to DeepSeek v3 through OpenRouter.
- **PlanAndExecuteAgent**: Unified agent that creates plans, executes them step by step, and can optionally use tools.
- **Tool classes**: Extensible framework for adding capabilities (example included: `SearchTool`).

The agent will automatically break down any task into steps, execute each step using DeepSeek v3, optionally invoke tools, and synthesize the results into a final output.

## Architecture

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    U[User Task Input]
    U --> RUN[PlanAndExecuteAgent.run]
    RUN --> PLAN[create_plan]
    PLAN --> P1[planning_prompt]
    P1 --> LLM1[OpenRouterLLM.generate]
    LLM1 --> PARSE[Parse into steps list]
    PARSE --> LOOP[For each Step]
    LOOP --> EXEC[execute_step]
    EXEC --> CTX[_get_context]
    EXEC --> TOOLQ{Tool referenced?}
    TOOLQ -- Yes --> TEXEC[tool.execute]
    TEXEC --> P4[tool_interpretation_prompt]
    P4 --> LLM4[OpenRouterLLM.generate]
    LLM4 --> UPDATE[Update step status/result]
    TOOLQ -- No --> P2[execution_prompt]
    P2 --> LLM2[OpenRouterLLM.generate]
    LLM2 --> UPDATE
    UPDATE --> LOOP
    LOOP --> SYN[_synthesize_results]
    SYN --> P3[synthesis_prompt]
    P3 --> LLM3[OpenRouterLLM.generate]
    LLM3 --> FINAL[Final Result]
```

Notes:
- Prompts are constructed in `prompts.py` and consumed by `agent.py`.
- API key is read from `.env` via `python-dotenv` (`OPENROUTER_API_KEY`).
- The unified `PlanAndExecuteAgent` invokes registered `Tool`s when their names appear in step descriptions (example tool: `SearchTool`).

## Logging

- Each run writes a detailed session log to the `agentlog/` directory next to `agent.py`.
- The log file name is timestamped as `yyyymmddhhmm.log` (e.g., `202509112259.log`).
- Logged details include:
  - Planning prompts and LLM responses.
  - Parsed steps (or fallback plan notice).
  - Execution prompts and LLM responses for each step.
  - Tool selections, tool outputs, and the tool-interpretation prompts and LLM responses.
  - Synthesis prompt and final LLM response.
  - Any errors encountered during planning, execution, or synthesis.

You can open the latest file in `agentlog/` to see the full trace of what the agent did for that session.

## Diagrams (draw.io / diagrams.net)

GitHub does not natively render `.drawio` diagram sources in Markdown. The recommended approach is to:
- Keep the editable source as a `.drawio` file in the repo
- Export to `.svg` (or `.png`) and embed that image in the README

Editable source (for later refinement): `docs/architecture.drawio`

Rendered diagram (exported SVG):

![Architecture (draw.io)](docs/architecture.svg)

## Design Notes and TODOs

- Chat state is currently stateless per call.
  - `OpenRouterLLM.generate()` posts a single `user` message each time. There is no server-side session ID; prior context is not automatically preserved.
  - Consequence: Step 1 execution does not include the original task/system prompt unless explicitly added to the execution prompt.
  - TODO: introduce a chat-history flow where we resend prior turns on every API call via a `messages` array, including a seed `system` message.

- Keep model prompts in natural language, not JSON.
  - The API envelope is JSON, but the `content` sent to the model should remain plain, well-structured text.
  - Encoding prompts as JSON inside `content` tends to reduce quality and isn’t needed.

- Structured JSON logging for readability.
  - Add `_log_json(event, payload)` to record prompts/responses as one-line JSON records.
  - Log planning prompt/response, execution prompt/response (with `step_id`, `description`, `context`), tool usage, and synthesis prompt/response.
  - Optionally log a redacted request summary before each API call (model, temperature, max_tokens, count of messages) and a response summary (chars, preview).

- Step confirmation and perceived pause.
  - The prompt `Proceed with Step N ... [Y/N]` is read via `input()`; after `Y`, the agent constructs the execution prompt and performs a network call to the LLM.
  - The delay seen after confirming is the API round-trip/model latency; progress is captured in `agentlog/` (confirmation → prompt logged → response logged).

### Implementation Plan (deferred)

1) Add chat-history support
   - Extend `OpenRouterLLM` with `generate_messages(messages, temperature, max_tokens)`.
   - Track `self.chat_history: List[Dict[str,str]]` in `PlanAndExecuteAgent`.
   - Seed a `system` turn at `run()` start; append planning/step prompts as `user` turns and responses as `assistant` turns.

2) JSON structured logging
   - Add `_log_json(event, payload)` beside `_log()` and switch key log points to JSON entries.
   - Do not log secrets (API key). Prefer previews for very long texts.

3) Optional: include task in Step 1 prompt
   - Modify `execution_prompt()` to optionally prepend the original task to the first step’s prompt (config flag), while still relying on chat history for later steps.

4) Optional: tool-observation turns
   - If tools are used, emit an `<observation>`-style `user` message and call `generate_messages()` again to mimic tool-feedback loops.
